## IT

Here I refer to IT, information technology, as internal company tooling and technology used to conduct business on a daily basis. This is in contrast to the technology your company is building for its customer product.

IT usually comprises tools like company hardware (desktops, laptops, and phones), VPNs, email, antivirus and monitoring software, etc. As a startup in the modern world, whether you're an in-person or remote team, if you make a few wise decisions, you should not need to spend very much time or capital on IT.

Some key decisions that will help you minimize IT cost at most small tech companies:

Use a cloud-based system for company email, data, and documents. Most startups are using Google Workspace, but if your team members (and prospective future hires) are more comfortable with an alternative, go with that. There's no benefit at this stage in setting up your own in-house mail server, document storage, data access, networking, etc.

Early on, unless required to by a compliance system, don't requireemployees to use company hardware. At small scale purchasing (especially pre-product market fit), provisioning and managing company hardware is a non-trivial effort (and cost!) that provides only marginal or rare real-world benefits.

It's perhaps painful to acknowledge, but properly securing your product and IT system is a considerable task, and unrealistic for a young startup to do exhaustively early on. I encourage you to be pragmatic and focus on securing your system from the most likely sources of breach or data theft: human error by your employees. It's far more likely your engineering team forgot to put authentication in front of an API, or somebody leaves their laptop unlocked at a coffee shop, than an attacker manages to man in the middle your data or hack into your cloud infrastructure using an exploit.

Even following best practices to minimize IT effort, you'll still have some IT tasks you cannot avoid, primarily around activating and deactivating user accounts and password recovery for employees. I encourage you to document for and train other coworkers, perhaps in HR, in how to do these tasks so they do not interrupt you or the engineering team on a regular basis.
